From hanselminutes.com. It's Hanselman. That's
a weekly discussion with web
developer and technologist Scott Hanselman.
This is Lawrence Ryan announcing show
number three 65. Recorded live
Thursday, March 28th, 2013. Support for Hanselman
it's as provided by Tellerik
offering the best in developer
tools and support online@telerikdotcomandbyfranklins.net makers
of gesture pack a powerful
gesture, recording and recognition system
for Microsoft connect for windows
developers details@gesturepak.com. In this episode,
Scott talks with Steve Sanderson
about phone gap Cordova. Hi,
this is Scott Hanselman. This
is another episode of Hansel
minutes and we've got Steve
Sanderson on the line. How
are you, sir? Hey, I'm
very good. Thank you. How
are you? Lovely, lovely. Congratulations.
You just put out a
iPhone application. I did, yes.
It has been something I've
been wanting to do for
a couple of years, but
I haven't really had a
good opportunity and I decided
that that's never going to
happen. Actually. I just need
to stay up really late
and do it anyway. Well,
you, you're a pretty impressive
guy and you've done a
lot of interesting stuff. I
know that you're a web
person and I know that
you're the author of knockout,
but I did not know
that you knew objective C,
which means I'm a horrible
person. Cause you know, all
the languages, I think it
would. I'm not sure that
it would make me a
better person to know. Objective
C actually I'd be quite
scared of a version of
either. No, I have been
sticking with my favorite web
technologies and I have built
this iPhone app, which gave
me a good opportunity to
put knockout, to use in
a different kind of application
and also to use a
backend in the cloud, which
relates to products. I work
on apps, Microsoft. So it
was cool actually, to be
able to use a lot
of technologies that I'm involved
in developing turned them into
something fun. So how about
a little background for folks
who may be web developers,
but don't know what phone
gap is and don't know
what knockout is. Okay. Sure.
Well, a knockout is a
model view view model library
for JavaScript. So it basically
provides a nice way of
architecting, rich JavaScript applications so
that you can separate up
your code into views, which
are nice and simple and
few models, which are object
oriented and self contained and
bind them together. So it's
kind of one of the
current generation of model view
libraries that are becoming very
popular. So you find that
a knockout chest.com and I
actually think a lot of
people have heard of it
if you haven't been in
charge of tutorials and such
that and a phone gap,
I would imagine that probably
just about everyone has heard
of it, but just to
kind of make sure everyone's
clear about what it is.
It's a way of packaging,
a web application so that
it can be submitted to
mobile app stores and marketplaces.
So you write HTML and
JavaScript and CSS, and as
long as it doesn't directly
depend on loading pages from
server, then, you know, and
then it's just static files,
then it can be packaged
up into this artifact that
gets submitted. And does it
use JavaScript to call functions
that are native functions? So
the idea with phone gap
is that you will structure
the majority of your user
interface with familiar HTML and
CSS. And at runtime phone
gap is providing a sort
of Chrome list browser by
chromosomes. There's no sort of,
you know, URL bar or
anything like that. It's just
the sort of surface of
the browser. So the user
using it doesn't know it's
a browser, particularly if you
style it to look like
a native app, but it
is effectively a browser. And
so yes, you would use
JavaScript and CSS and everything
else that you are familiar
with as a web developer
to structure your application. And
you wouldn't normally be using
native control to though it
is to some extent possible
to use native controls from
your platform. It's a bit
difficult, but it can partly
be done. And is this
like, this is real or
is this a pale kind
of Similac room of what
an application would look like?
Like I, I wonder if
this is a legitimate way
to write an app and
try to, I wouldn't say
fool, but definitely give the
user the expectation of native
speed and quality. Well, it's
very often a criticism that's
brought up. In fact, you
can barely go like a
week before. There's some sort
of hacker news post about
comparing native and web mobile
apps is a big debate.
I think generally people are
of the opinion that for
sort of ultimate perfection then
yeah, native apps do come
with some advantages in the
sense that they come with
all the built in controls
for your platform. So they
kind of going to look
perfect by default. And of
course those controls and the
implementation is all optimized for
the hardware that the stuff
is running on. So in,
in a sense, it may
seem like using HTML and
CSS to try and simulate.
That is a bit of
a, a cheap trick. That's
never going to quite be
as good, but I don't
think that really truly expresses
the reality of it. So
there's an application that I've
been working on, which I've
just a blog post for
the video. And I think
that most people have tried
it, which I agree that
it looks and feels basically
the same as a native
app. So I just had
to write a bunch of
CSS in order to get
the same parents and the
same kind of transitions that
have here in native iOS
apps and the net result.
I'm pretty confident any normal
person would not consider for
a minute is not a
native app. It just, you
know, normal person just would
never think that it's different
to any of the other
apps that are running on
that phone. So I, I'm
confident that it's possible to
achieve basically the same level
of fluidity and richness, but
in some ways there's more
work involved in doing it
because you have to actually
implement the appearance of all
your controls yourself. But on
the other hand, you save
a lot of time because
you don't have to learn
some new language and new
UI frameworks. So if you
are going to write a
project that's really intends to
share code across multiple platforms.
You know, if you're going
to target Android, iOS and
windows phone, then really developing
your application from scratch in
three different languages, three different
UI frameworks is probably so
inefficient that taking the time
to replicate the UI that
you want in Houston, Alan
CSS is a quite reasonable
alternative, But surely there's, there's
existing CSS that gives you
the buttons and the, I
mean, you're not literally trying
to make pixel perfect versions
of iPhone buttons yourself. That's
up to you. Now, my
objectives was cause it was
partly experimental. I really wanted
to see if I can
genuinely create something that was
exactly like native. So I
did actually create all of
my elements completely from scratch
because that gave me like
total control of however thing
looks. But if you are
more inclined just to get
stuff done, then there are
frameworks that you can take.
So I would probably have
the available ones recommend looking
at Sentia touch that's that
seems to be pretty much
the leading option in terms
of producing a good user
experience. Obviously people have also
heard of jQuery mobile, which
tries to do a similar
thing. Nah, on my, on
my website, I can say,
add to home screen and
then pin it. And when
I run it though, I
pull it down and I
see that I'm running in
Safari. So it's really just
a bookmark Fullscreen bookmark there's
phone gap slash Cordova is,
is, is a shell of
its own. Yes. So it
is a native app as
far as the phone is
concerned. So it's installed just
like every other native app.
You get it from the
marketplace or store. It just
so happens that the implementation
is that when it starts
off, it starts a web
browser control that takes up
the whole screen with no
address bar and then, and
then your pages, which are
bundled with the app show
up in there. So yeah,
as far as the phone
is concerned, it's not just
a bookmark to a website
is an actual app. It's
just that the application, sorry.
The implementation happens to be
with web technologies. When, when
phone gap first came out,
I pretty much understood it
and I felt pretty good
about it. But then somehow
people started saying Cordova instead
of phone gap. And, and
this might be really, I
mean, I know the phone
gap guys will listen and
I'll get an email from
them afterwards. But as soon
as that name happened, then
I became a little bit
confused and I was just
like, okay, I don't know
what's going on over there.
Those guys haven't got their
thing together. I'm going to
wait and find out what
happens. Cause I don't know
the difference between the two,
nor should I be asked
to know the difference. Please
explain to me why two
Your names. All right. Yeah.
It's, it's, it's weird. But
basically the project was always
called phone gap when it
was originally created by a
company called Toby and then
they transferred the ownership over
to the Apache foundation. And
as part of that, they
needed a new name that
was not at risk of
infringing, any trademarks. So they
came up with various alternative
names. They were calling it
a call back at one
stage, which was a ridiculous
name. Cause you can't search
the web for that without
getting all kinds of things.
And eventually they decided that
they would call the technology
Cordova and that the inspiration
for that came from the
fact that new Toby were
based on Cordova street in
Vancouver, anywhere that's kind of
irrelevant. They came up with
Colinette Cordova. So now Cordova
is the technology that's licensed
by Apache phone gap. On
the other hand is a
particular distribution of Cordova from
Adobe and also ties in
with other Adobe services like
phone got build, which is
a cloud based build system
for quarter reputations. So a
good analogy would be to
think that just like webcam
is the underlying technology for,
let's say Safari, which is
a distribution of a web
browser. That includes webcast. Similarly
holdover is the underlying technology,
which is distributed in a
package called phone gap. If
that makes sense. I see.
So like chromium and Chrome.
Yeah, yeah. Pretty much like
that. Yeah. The only weird
thing is that since foam
cup is they own the
distribution of cult over the
exists is kind of nonsensical
out into two different minds.
Yeah. Okay. So then for
the most part, when I
see the two names online,
I can just mentally exchange
them. It's not like one
does one thing and one
does the other. Yeah. Typically
people just use them interchangeably
without knowing why there were
two names. Okay. All right.
Well this sounds like magical
and wonderful and we should
all immediately drop what we're
doing and start using phone
cap to do all of
our work. Right. I would
say that for certain projects,
it's the advantages outweigh the
disadvantages, but for equally many
projects there were versus true.
So I mean, I mentioned
some of the advantages, the
obvious, the fact that you
get to use your web
development skills and you don't
have to learn new languages
and new UI frameworks. Other
really compelling things I found
when I was developing my
app, that was just amazingly
wonderful. Was if I need
a library to do something,
I can just go and
get hub. And there's like
58 Brazilian JavaScript libraries on
that. And I can just
pull any one of them
off and it's just going
to work. It's wonderful. And,
and in some ways HTML
and CSS are actually a
better native UI framework. Sorry,
better UI framework than the
native alternatives for certain types
of screens. Like something that's
like a document is really
easy to do in HTML,
but it's very hard in
certain native frameworks. And also,
I just think that modern
JavaScript code can be really
nicely structured. And I can't
really say the same for
the kind of effect I
see commonly in the wild.
So yeah, there are, there
are tons of really good
things, but it would be
unfair to leave out of
that because I would say
there were some massive drawbacks
to this as well. Like
if your objective is to
make an app that feels
native, then you know, you've
got tons of extra work
to do because you have
to reimplement all of these
standard controls and transitions and
such using HTML and JavaScript,
unless you're going to just
take an off the shelf
implementation. But if you do
that, then it's probably not
going to really look and
feel native. Another major drawback
would be the fact that
you can't really use mixed
native controls in with your
HTML user interfaces. And now
you kind of, can't like
in my app, I use
the native map control, but
I had to design the
UI in such a way
that it didn't overlap with
anything in an awkward way,
because it's kind of like
a, I've just got the
map and it's just overlaid
certain pixel coordinates on the
screen, like independently of anything
else. And so I line
it up so that it
looks like it's meant to
be there, but you know,
it's sort of also other
drawbacks would be that you
do have to think carefully
about performance is possible to
get really great forms and
you know, the wonderfully smooth
animations with CSS, transitions and
such. But if you're not
careful and if you use
the wrong kind of animations,
then performance can be pretty
bad, particularly on older devices
and while different, just like
on when developing for the
normal browsers, you have to
be aware of cross browser
differences in phone gap, because
let's say the Android browser
is quite different to sorry
on iOS, even though they're
both based on webcast and
then windows phone obviously is
based on IIE, which is
different again. So you do
have to start thinking about
cross browser stuff. And, and
finally, if you want to
use any API APIs that
are not exposed by phone
gap, then you need to
sign some native code anyway.
So you can't necessarily avoid
having to do some native
code unless you're writing a
very limited app that only
does things that phone got
as anticipated. So yeah, I
think there are quite few
drawbacks to that. And if
you are coming to, into
a project and trying to
decide whether this is right
for you or not, I
would suggest that if you
are a web developer already,
and you're fairly confident in
your JavaScript skills and your
project intends to target multiple
platforms, like at least two
of Android iOS and windows
phone, then perhaps on balance
phone gap is going to
be a more efficient way
of delivering your project and
learning new languages and frameworks.
On the other hand, if
you're only trying to target
one platform or you don't
already have very strong web
development skills, then I think
that it would probably be
a pretty bad move to
be trying to use these
technologies. You can probably become
moderately competent in building a
native app with probably just
a week or two intensive
reading of a book. And
I think that amount of
investment would probably outweigh the,
the costs. If you are
only trying to talk at
one platform, What about data
access? I mean, I understand
how to call restful web
services and how to move
Jason around. And I re
I, I'm assuming I haven't
looked a lot at objective
C, but I'm assuming that
it's pretty, you know, because
Jason is so trivially moved
in and out of JavaScript
because it is JavaScript that,
you know, this idea of
serialization and deserialization just kind
of goes away. So I'm
assuming that there's literally no
problem moving data from place
to place. But my question
is, what about storing it
on the disc? I mean,
surely you have some local
cash. How do you have
a local database and things
like that? Yeah. Well, third,
you've got quite a few
options, actually, if you using
phone gap, so you can
do the same stuff that
the native developers do, which
is to call into whatever
native that storage libraries exist.
So going with iOS again,
and the there's something I'll
call data, which is an
NRM basically object relational mapper
for and SQL Lite database.
And a phone gap has
exposes those APIs into your
JavaScript code. So you can
just, you know, call those
directly and the days will
get saved in the same
way, but you're not limited
to that because since you
are in a browser, you
can use things like local
storage and you can even
use the HTML file system
API to write files, to
disk in whatever custom format
you want. And that last
option is actually what I
did in my application. So
my data all exists in
Jason format, which is stored
in a backend in the
cloud, but for maintaining a
local cache, I just don't
see Jace on files as
text files to the desk.
Each time he changed them,
then when the app starts
up, I can load them
some desk and carry on
as before I said desk,
I mean, you know, slash
storage and, and then just
carry on. So I didn't
actually have to look at
mapping my data into a
relational database or anything. I'm
just working with Jason Bob's
cause it fits quite nicely
into the structure. Yeah, that's
actually an interesting technique. That's
probably worth digging into a
little bit, cause I've used
and shown a number of
demos that you've done. Like
in my talk on mobile,
I use your conference browser
and the, your, your single
page conference browser, where we
basically look at sessions and
dates and people who gave
them an abstracts and rooms.
And we kind of pivot
on that data. The, the
demo that I give you
basically have one big Jason
file. And then you use,
if I remember correctly underscore,
which is kind of like
link for JavaScript. Yeah. I
don't remember exactly. Yeah. Yeah.
Well, well I guess I'm
bringing that up because it's
such a clever and simple
way to have a little
database when the data is
shaped a certain way. Yeah.
Yeah. It's, it's really good
as an approach for the
kind of apps that target
consumers, typically why the consumer
has got their own data
or there's some sort of
reasonable boundary around all the
data that a single individual
is ever going to want
to see, because then you
can roughly estimate that it's
feasible to just drop it
all in one big block.
Obviously there are types of
apps which wouldn't be applicable
for some like stock trading
app where you've got to
be able to search back
through decades worth of financial
records, or let's say the
whole of amazon.com. You wouldn't
really want the entire catalog
to exist in one giant
envelope. That's loaded into memory,
but yeah, for those apps
where the amount of debt
is bounded, then it's enormously
convenient not to have to
look at splitting it up
into little pieces that can
go into different tables. And
so on. That is effectively
what you did. I mean,
you have this local single
Jason file or do you
have a whole? So I,
with, with my application, the
app is the principle of
it is that the user
wants to create lists of
places that they like to
go. And then they write
reviews and our photos and
give all the pieces of
information relating to the place.
So I decided to split
up the data on a
per list basis. So for
each list that you've got,
which is no, this might
be like my favorite cafes
in Bristol or something like
that. Each one of those
is a separate file, a
separate directory. And in that
directory, I drop all of
the photos that you've uploaded
and such, and the reason
for splitting it up. Like
that means that there is
some level of scale scalability
built into this. So if
each individual list becomes so
large that it starts to
strain the kind of amount
of stuff that you can
learn and say, if our
performance starts hurting, then at
least the performance doesn't depend
on how many lists you've
got in total. It's just
depends on the size of
each individual list. But, you
know, for every application, that
would be some of the
reasonable kind of, I suppose,
demand driven design people call
it an aggregate roots, you
know, kind of national boundary
around a group of related
data where it's reasonable to
say that that whole group
changes as an atomic unit
and is independent from other
islands of data. And the
application is called tour. Yeah,
that's right. Yeah. So T
O U R a lot
too, a lot. So if
that's on the iOS app
store, so yeah, definitely recommend
checking out and seeing what
you think of how good
or bad and it Chanel
and JavaScript UI can be.
I am, I'm pretty pleased
with that. I think most
people who've seen it who
know about these things have
been very positive about our
native, like it as certainly
on recent devices, like iPhone
for us. And later it's
basically indistinguishable from native, although
on some older devices, like
I've tried it on a
three GS, it's a bit
sluggish, but you know, not
really use this. And I
suppose people on those devices
will probably find that most
of their apps of it
as well. And the feedback
has been positive, no one
has called it out and
said, Hey, look at that.
That's not, that's clearly not
native or people all assuming
what I did, which is
that Steve has learned objective,
Well, whenever I've introduced it
to people in person I've
been talking about the technology.
So I don't think anybody
as well in my conversations,
people have known what it
is, but yeah, people have
been very positive about that.
And yeah, like I say,
I think it's, I think
it genuinely is pretty close.
So yeah, I think the
argument, the HTML and JavaScript
can't compete on a pure
user experience basis is not
really correct. At least not
for those applications that are
basically forms and lists and
that sort of thing. Now,
obviously when you get into
games, that's entirely different. And
if you imagine some kind
of ridiculously elaborate facts that
don't map to any sort
of CSS transitions or something,
then a native apps would
obviously have a significant advantage.
Yeah. I always think about
apps like Foursquare. And I
think if, if for, if
you could write Foursquare in
phone gap, then that would
be a pretty amazing example
of it can do anything.
I would have to find
out what force could have
is like, in order to,
I'm sorry, Because you use
the example like the, the,
the, I guess there's probably
not a lot of places
to check in in Bristol,
but the It's just the,
I'm not highly social person.
So, you know, any of
these social kinds of things.
Yeah. Yeah. Well, you know,
your app has that very
kind of classic iOS look
in, you know, the done
button and the, the, the,
the lists and the lists
pivot into a square, you
know, grids of photos. And
then you can hold down
the photos and then delete
them. It's just, it's a
very classic look. So I
could definitely see that metaphor
being extended, but then apps
like Evernote or Foursquare or
Twitter apps are all trying
to just be a little
different. They want to look
like an iOS app, but
they want to change their
style. And iOS itself is
now ironically moving towards a
flatter experience. People are saying
that they're heading in the
direction of flat design, kind
of all Allah Metro, Metro
design language. And I think
that, that the Metro design
language is kind of moving
slightly towards the middle. So
we're all gonna find ourselves
in this kind of slightly
flats, not middle place. Yeah.
Hopefully phone gap will be
able to make that happen
for us. Is there a,
is there a backend to
this when I make a
list? Yes, there is. So
the app is designed to
work primarily offline because if
you are traveling around on
your vacation or whatever, and
you are making a list
of things that you've seen,
obviously you don't want to
need some network connections. So
everything by default is just
working against your local storage.
But the point of the
app is that when you
have built something, create some
list of places that you're
proud of. You want to
share it with your friends.
So there's a published feature
where it goes up into
the cloud and then effectively,
you've got a website that
you can point people to,
which shows them everything that
you've created in your photos
and that sort of thing.
So naturally there has to
be some kind of backend
service in order to actually
store that data and to
serve it up as a
website. So the way I've
done this involves a few
components. Are you familiar with
the term backend as a
service Backend as a service?
I mean, I, I think
I am, but it couldn't
hurt to tell the people
to. So if you are
learning, saving sort of pretty
straightforward Jason data, and you
want to store it in
a database and then query
later and then do authentication.
These are really ridiculously common
requirements. So common that it's,
in other words, it's like
every mobile app basically has
to do this. And yet,
even though it's so common
for a long time, people
were still just reinventing their
own implementation of that from
scratch every single time. So
maybe they were using something
like weather API, or even
rails, or some of the
kinds of web technology that
can accept Jaison data and
respond to HTTP requests. You
know, that's, it's a reasonable
approach, but it's a lot
of money we'll work to
implement that from scratch. And
also you then have the
responsibility of deploying, get yourself,
maintaining the hosting environment it's
on managing your own like
security and that sort of
thing. So in recent years,
there's been a bit of
a movement towards the spec
end of the service concept,
which is where instead of
inventing your own backend with
whether it's AI or rails
or whatever, from scratch, you
can just sign up to
you as long as it
already exists. And then you
can configure it, say, Oh,
the daytime wants a story
is going to be in
this shape. And I want
to use this kind of
authentication. And I need to
plug in a bit of
custom server side logic here,
that sort of thing, that
there's a bunch of different
podcasts as a service products
that are out there right
now. And people will probably
have heard of pause.com. That's
pretty well known. So the
things like stack mob and
others whose name I don't
remember anyway, there's, there is
one from Microsoft and it's
called windows Azure mobile services.
And that's the project I
actually work on at the
moment. So naturally I wanted
to have an opportunity of
using that as a real
user. So that is where
your data, all that stored
when you actually publish it
from this app. And it's
stored in exactly the same
format that exists on the
device like Jason and the
backend also manages some handy
things like authentication. So you
can log in with Facebook,
Twitter, Google, or Microsoft accounts.
And I didn't actually have
to write any code to
make that happen, or at
least I didn't have to
write any code to interface
directly with those providers, because
that is a feature that's
built into Azure mobile services.
You just have to say
that you want to use
all those authentication mechanisms. And
then basically the client library
deals with presenting the login
UIs and everything. So there's
a, there's a, there's a
phone gap. You a plug
in for this. Yeah. So
we've just two weeks ago.
Is it three? Now we
released a web client library
for Azure mobile services, which
means that you can connect
to it from any browser
based application or phone apps.
And so on GAAP is
effectively a browser application, and
that means that your JavaScript
can save data or query
against these cloud Techstars that
you can configure and also
deals with the authentication. So
for example, if you want
to make someone login to
Twitter, you just say, client
dot login, pass the string
of Twitter, and then you
get a call back. So
the client library that point
will pop open a Twitter
login UI. And when the
user logs in, then it
also gives you a call
back to give you the
authentic Twitter user ID. And
that is all validated on
the server, obviously with proper
cryptographic authentication headers. So yeah,
that's, that's where it can
be done and it's built
into the client's library. So
I was able to add
that to my app pretty
easily. And it supports arbitrary
service side scripts as well
that you can write in
JavaScript. So I have my
UI code on my server
side code in JavaScript, which
is nice. And yeah, it
works really well. I was
pretty happy with of all
the things that I used
in my project. That was
probably one that gave me
the least amount of difficulty
We have not because you
wrote it. I think the
fact that I'm quite familiar
with it probably helps. Yeah.
And are you giving the
code away to this or
is this going to be
something that's going to be
a weekend project and you'll
keep it to yourself? I'm
not in it at this
point, I had this odd
tension as I was working
on it because I have
the sort of habit of
making libraries, open source projects
and stuff. And I was
desperately trying not to create
some new open source projects
with us, even though I
kept thinking, Oh, this is
where usable, that's really usable
because I would have immediately
got sidelined into implementing sort
of 400 use cases that
I didn't even have myself.
And I was doing this,
you know, at two in
the morning and I just
wanted to ship the thing.
So, so no I'm resisting
the urge to start releasing
code and maintaining things. But
I am actually just going
to blog a bunch of
posts about the techniques that
I've used and that certain
people do want to .
We use some of the
codes and they'll get to
get it that way, but
then at least I don't
have to, you know, deal
with people, send me issue
reports. Yeah. I think you've
done a lot in open
source. We don't need to
ask you to do too
much more. This is, this
is pretty cool. This is
very exciting. I'm looking forward
to, to seeing your posts
and reading about how you
built this, the more detail,
the better. Cool, brilliant. Well,
this has been another episode
of Hanselminutes and we'll see
you again next week.